CSC 151.01 Project Final Statement
Final Design Statement
We are using overlapping and increasing sizes of figures and various colors to explore illusion of depth.
We changed our design from a tree to a flower because during the process, we realized that the color combinations and the shape of tree was hard to put together. The tree’s canopy cannot be depicted like the sketches. During the process of attempting to draw the tree, we found that we could produce interesting and overlapping drawings. Therefore, we decided to switch to drawing flowers.
The drawing from the first picture to the last picture is an abstract and geometric flower, with different color combinations and background to create different effects. The backbone of the flowers is comprised of similar subunits of circles, extending from a center to six different directions. The major part of the flower is a continuing regular geometric shape of stars, imposing on the backbone and spinning around the center of the flower from a point to a larger span. The intersection with the backbone produce a trend from outside to the center, creating an illusion of depth on a two-dimensional surface. There are always five stars in one circle, so the interval between them is increasing. The third part is the icing on the cake – several smaller flowers with different geometric shape surround the border of the major part, creating an extension of view.  Different flowers will have different sizes.
The colors of the background mostly consist strong contrast by juxtaposing two complementary colors to send strong visual stimulus. Most of the background colors have similarly lower values so they seem impressive. Some have a high degree of saturation, seemed brighter and distinctive.
The flowers have various color too. Each flower starts its color from a point on the color wheel and change the color along the color wheel so it has a sense of color harmony and there will not be strong contrasts among flowers. The color of flower will be analogous to the background so it will not interfere the visual stimulus.

Final technique Statement
The image is made by two certain kinds of flowers (flower 4 and 5 in the code) plus one other type of flower (either flower 1 or 3 in the code). To generate 1000 different images, we use n as the random seed for generating different shapes, colors and sizes of flowers. The background is also decided by n but has mainly dark and light two series of colors which uses image-compute.
The first type of flower is drawing squares along drawing a spiral which uses Turtle only. The third type of flower is also drawing squares but along drawing several spirals and emanates from the center of the image which also uses Turtle only. The fourth type of flower is drawing little circles along drawing spirals which will make three lines intersects with each other in the center of the image, which uses both Turtle and GIMP tool. The fifth type of flower is drawing stars, which uses turtle,  along drawing spirals. The second type of flower is making six same type of flowers choosing from either first, third or fifth type of flower, locating around the central figure.


